.TH SOCKD 8 "February 9, 1994"
.SH NAME
sockd \- Internet firewall secure socket server (proxy server)
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsockd [ \-ver | \-i | \-I ]\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIsockd \fR is an internet secure socket server, often referred to
as a proxy server. It was designed
primarily to provide hosts within a firewall access to resources
outside of the firewall.

Normally, hosts inside a firewall has no IP-accessibility to the network
outside of the firewall. This reduces the risk of being intruded
by unauthorized people from the Internet. Unfortunately, without
IP-accessibility users on the inside hosts can no longer use many
of the important tools such as telnet, ftp, xgopher, Mosaic, etc. to
access the tremendous resources available in the Internet. 

With \fIsockd\fR installed on a server host, users on the other
inside hosts can gain back the lost functionalities by using
clients programs designed to work with \fIsockd\fR proxy server,
e.g, \fIrtelnet\fR in place of \fItelnet\fR, \fIrftp\fR in place
of \fIftp\fR, \fIrfinger\fR in place of \fIfinger\fR,
etc. Since these client programs work
like their normal counterparts without requiring direct IP-accessibility
to the Internet, convenience to the uesrs is accomplished without
breaching the security. The server host that runs \fIsockd\fR does
have to be open to the Internet, and it therefore requires special
attention to make sure that it is secure.

\fIsockd\fR is usually installed in directory /usr/etc and should
be run under the control of \fIinetd\fR. To do so,
add the line

.nf
.in +1
socks	1080/tcp

.fi
.in -1
to file \fB/etc/services\fP, and the line

.nf
.in +1
socks	stream	tcp	nowait	nobody	/usr/etc/sockd	sockd

.fi
.in -1
to file \fB/etc/inetd.conf\fP. Then send a SIGHUP signal to the
running \fIinetd\fR process to make it read and use the new contents
of the files. You may also choose to use \fIidentd\fR (RFC 1413) to verify
the user's identity by appending option \fB\-i\fP or \fB\-I\fP to
the line in \fB/etc/inetd.conf\fP.

A configuration file \fB/etc/sockd.conf\fP is used to control access
to \fIsockd\fR and its services. Permission and denial of a service
request can be decided based on various combinations of the requesting
host, the destination host, the type of service (destination port number),
as well as the requesting user. (See \fIsockd.conf\fP(5).)

If the server host is multi-homed, i.e., having more than one network
interface and with its IP_FORWARDING turtned off, it must run a multi-homed
version of \fIsockd\fP, which requires another control file
\fB/etc/sockd.route\fP to decide which interface to use for connection
to any given destination host. See \fIsockd.route\fP(5).

A program called \fItest_sockd_conf\fP is provided for you to check
your \fIsockd\fR configuration file(s). Be sure to use it everytime after
you modify the configuration file(s).

\fIsockd\fR uses \fIsyslog\fR with facility \fBdaemon\fP and level
\fBnotice\fP to log its activities and errors. Typical lines look
like

.nf
.in +1
Apr 11 08:51:29 eon sockd[636]: connected -- Connect from don(don)@abc.edu to wxy.com (telnet)
Apr 11 09:24:59 eon sockd[636]: terminated -- Connect from don(don)@abc.edu to wxy.com (telnet)
Apr 11 09:24:59 eon sockd[636]: 1048 bytes from abc.edu, 285143 bytes from wxy.com
Jun 22 18:24:54 eon sockd[884]: refused -- Connect from sam(unknown)@big.com to small.com (ftp)
.in -1
.fi

In these lines, the first user-id is the one reported by the client program,
the second one (within the parentheses) is what is reported by \fIidentd\fP
on the client host.
These log lines usually appear in file \fB/var/adm/messages\fP though that
can be changed by modifying \fB/etc/syslog.conf\fP. (See \fIsyslogd\fR(8)
and \fIsyslog.conf\fR(5).)

If you allow access to infosystems such as Gopher or WWW,
you should be aware that they by nature would tend to get connections
to hosts all over the world and would use not only Gopher and WWW ports
but possibly also ports for finger, telnet, ftp, nntp, etc. as well as
non-priveleged ports ( > 1023).
.SH OPTIONS
The options are mutually exclusive and thus may only be used one at a time.
.TP
.B\-ver
With this option, \fIsockd\fR prints its own version number,
whether it is a single-homed or multi-homed version, and whether
it supports clients that use Rrcmd(), and then quits.
.TP
.B\-I
Use \fIidentd\fR (RFC 1413) to verify the requester's user-id. Deny access if
connection to client's \fIidentd\fR fails or if the result does not match
the user-id reported by the client program. Client hosts without a properly
installed \fIidentd\fR daemon will not be served. User verification is
done before and in addition to the normal access control.
.TP
.B\-i
Similar to \fB-I\fP but more lenient. Access is denied only if client's
\fIidentd\fR reports a user-id that's different from what the client
program claims.
.PP
Log entries similar to the following are produced upon failure of
user-id verification:

.nf
.in +1
Apr 15 14:42:51 eon sockd[729]: cannot connect to identd on big.edu
Apr 15 14:42:51 eon sockd[729]: refused -- Connect from bob(unknown)@big.edu to xyz.com (ftp)
Jul 15 12:23:06 eon sockd[832]: *Alert*: real user is sam, not jim
Jul 15 12:23:06 eon sockd[832]: refused -- Connect from jim(sam)@abc.org to bad.place.com (WWW)
.in -1
.fi
.SH FILES
\fB/etc/sockd.conf\fP, \fB/etc/inetd.conf\fP, \fB/etc/services\fP,
\fB/var/adm/messages\fP, \fB/etc/syslog.conf\fP
.SH SEE ALSO
\fIsocks_clients\fP(1), \fItest_sockd_conf\fP(8), \fIsockd.conf\fp(5),
\fIsockd.route\fP(5), \fIsocks.conf\fP(5)
.SH AUTHOR
.nf
David Koblas, koblas@sgi.com
Ying-Da Lee, ylee@syl.dl.nec.com
