.TH SOCKD.ROUTE 5 "November 17, 1993"
.SH NAME
sockd.route \- Routing file for multi-homed SOCKS proxy server
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB/etc/sockd.route\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file \fB/etc/sockd.route\fP is used by a multi-homed SOCKS server
\fIsockd\fP to determine which of its network interfaces it should
use to reach a given destination host.

A multi-homed host is a host with more than one network interfaces
and with its IP_FORWARDING turned off. Only the multi-homed version of
\fIsockd\fP can be run on such hosts. Hosts which have a single
network interface or that have enabled IP_FORWARDING -- even
with multiple network interfaces -- can run the single-homed version
of \fIsockd\fP, which requires no use of \fB/etc/sockd.route\fP.

A line in the file can be up to 1024 characters long. Lines starting
with a `#' are comments. Non-comment lines must be of the form

\fIif_addr		dst_addr  dst_mask\fR

All three fields are required and are separated by spaces or tabs.
Each filed is specified in the usual dotted form of IP addresses,
e.g., 128.23.16.2.
\fIif_addr\fR must be the IP address of one of the network interfaces
on the SOCKS server host. The \fIdst_addr dst_mask\fR pair together
specify the destination IP address or a range of destination IP
addresses. Bits in \fIdst_mask\fP that are set to 0 indicate the
bit positions to be ignored during comparison of IP addresses. So,
specifying 255.255.255.255 in \fIdst_mask\fP demands an exact match
with \fIdst_addr\fP, whereas 0.0.0.0 in \fIdst_mask\fP causes a
matching with any given destination address regardless of what is
specified for \fIdst_addr\fP.

When a multi-homed \fIsockd\fP receives a network request, it first
checks with \fB/etc/sockd.conf\fP to decide whether the request
should be allowed or denied. For an allowable request, \fIsockd\fP
then checks the given destination IP address against the \fIdst_addr
dst_mask\fP pair in \fB/etc/sockd.route\fP, one line at a line. Once
a match is found, the network interface of the corresponding
\fIif_addr\fR field is used for connection to the destination host.
Remaining lines in the file are skipped. Therefore the order of the
lines in the file is of extreme importance. If no match is found
throughout the file, a line indicating the error is produced using
\fIsyslog\fP with facility \fBdaemon\fP and level \fIerr\fP and
\fIsockd\fP then terminates.

The program \fItest_sockd_conf\fP checks \fB/etc/sockd.conf\fR as well
as the regular configuration file \fB/etc/sockd.conf\fP.
See \fItest_sockd_conf\fP(8).

.SH EXAMPLES
Suppose you have a dual-homed host with interface 129.1.2.3 connecting
to your internal Class B network 129.1, and interface 129.1.254.1
connecting to the outside world. If you only use the SOCKS server
to provide connections to outside hosts, then the file \fB/etc/sockd.route\fP
only needs one line:

.nf
.+1
129.1.254.1	0.0.0.0  0.0.0.0
.fi
.-1

If you also use the SOCKS server to provide connection to internal
hosts as well, then two lines would suffice:

.nf
.+1
129.1.2.3	129.1.0.0  255.255.0.0
129.1.254.1	0.0.0.0  0.0.0.0
.fi
.-1

Note that these two lines must be in the order given above.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fIsockd\fP(8), \fIsockd.route\fP(5), \fItest_sockd_conf\fP(8),
\fIsocks.conf\fP(5), \fIsocks_clients\fP(1)
